Digital Techonology
 Learning Experience-2
 Learning Experience-2
 Digital Solutions 
through Digital Gifts
 Session- 1: Digital content and target group of the content.
 In the learning experience “Digital Solutions through Digital Gifts,” we will engage in 
a fun activity of creating a digital gift for our near and dear ones. The gift we will make 
should be something useful to them. To ensure this, it’s important to consider whether 
the person for whom the gift is intended will be able to use and enjoy it.
 Before making the gift, it’s 
crucial to understand the 
person who will receive it. 
Let’s read a story to grasp 
this concept better.
 In Jewel’s neighborhood, there was an old man who used to ask for help from people 
every day. He used the money he received to buy food. Jewel felt a strong desire to 
help the old man so that he wouldn’t have to rely on others for food every day. Jewel 
searched for information from different sources and discovered a support center in 
their area that specifically helps elderly people like that old man.
 Jewel visited the support center’s website and found their contact address. Jewel 
printed out the address and gave it to the old man, hoping it would be helpful. 
However, the next day, Jewel noticed that the old man was still asking people for 
help. Curious, Jewel approached the old man and asked why he was still seeking 
help from others. The old man explained that Jewel had given him a piece of paper 
but he does not know how to read, hence, couldn’t understand the information on 
the paper and didn’t know what to do.
 So, it is important that when we share information with someone, it won’t be useful if 
we don’t present it in a way useful to them. We need to consider this when we make 
gifts for someone.
 We will make a digital gift that can include various types of information. This gift will 
be in the form of digital content.
 Academic Year 2024
 15
Digital Solutions through Digital Gifts
 Content refers to any text, image, video, or other media that is shared with a specific 
audience or group of people. The specific audience or group we are targeting with the 
content is known as the target group. Content can be in the form of images, videos, 
music, or text that we encounter in different media such as television, the internet, 
newspapers, magazines, books, or billboards. The target audience for a particular piece 
of content can vary depending on its type.
 To better understand the concept of target groups for different types of content, we will play a 
game. Before starting the game, let’s explore some examples that will help us to play the game.
 Table: 2.1
 Cartoon
 Content
 Story books
 Advertisement of saree
 Target group
 Children and Teenagers
 People of a certain age who can read
 Women who wear saree
 Cricket match on TV
 Those who like cricket and have access to TV
 Let’s remember that a piece of content can have multiple audiences. For example, a 
poster that is advertising pens outside a school can target students, teachers, parents, 
and retailers of pens.
 Now, let’s understand the rules of our game. 
We will divide ourselves into groups within the classroom, with the back row being the 
starting point. The teacher will give a notebook to the last person in the row, which will 
contain the name and description of a piece of content. The last person in the row will 
write the content and then add the name of a target group below it. Once they finish 
writing, they pass the notebook to the next person in the row, who adds the name of an
other target group and passes it to the next person. We will continue this process until the 
notebook reaches the person at the front of the row. The team that reaches the front and 
correctly writes the most target group names will be declared the winner of the game.
 Academic Year 2024
 Preparation for the next day: next two days, we will take some time to think about the 
target audience of the content we see around us and have a discussion with a family 
member about our observations.
 16
Digital Techonology
 Session- 2: Let’s identify the target group to plan our gifts.
 When we develop content with the intention of educating, informing, inspiring, 
entertaining, or fulfilling other purposes for a particular population or group of people, 
that specific group becomes our target audience. In our previous session, we played 
a game to understand target groups better. Now we know many things about target 
groups. Besides identifying the target audience, context is another important aspect to 
consider in planning content creation.
 Let’s read another story today
Mitu and her friends noticed that their school premises were dirty, and they 
wanted to clean it up. They shared their interest with their class teacher, who 
explained that it was a big task requiring a large team to complete. Mitu and 
her friends brainstormed about who they could easily convince to join them in 
this cleaning effort. They realized that all the students in Mitu’s class were her 
friends, so it would be relatively easy to persuade them to participate in this 
good deed. Now, Mitu wondered how they could convince their classmates to 
join them. One student suggested giving a speech in the classroom explaining 
the importance of cleanliness. Another student proposed, “lets ask the teacher 
to write a notice, which would make it mandatory for everyone to participate.” 
Yet another student disagreed with the idea of forcing others and suggested 
performing a play about the significance of cleanliness. At the end of the play, 
everyone could come together and request to keep the school premises clean, 
promising to maintain cleanliness always.
 Academic Year 2024
 17
Academic Year 2024
 Situation or Context: Unclean school premises of Mitu
 Objective: Everyone’s participation in keeping the school premises clean
 Target group or person: All students of Mitu’s class
 Content: ‘Speech’, ‘Notice’, ‘Drama’, ‘Oath’
 Now it’s time to plan to prepare our gift. The teacher will assign us into groups based 
on the problems and their target groups given below. We will focus on one problem and 
its matching target group to work on.
 Problems Target groups
 1 A child in the family or neighborhood who hasn’t 
learned Bangla vowels and consonants yet. We have 
to teach them the vowels and consonants in Bangla.
 4-7 years old toddlers in 
our family or relatives /
 neighborhood
 2 A middle-aged person who struggles with calculations, 
for example- addition and subtraction.
 A middle-aged person in 
our family or neighborhood
 3 A foreigner who has come to Bangladesh but 
doesn’t understand the Bangla language. They need 
to learn some common Bangla words for everyday 
communication. The person understands English.
 An adult person who 
knows English
 4 A person who has never traveled alone in Dhaka and 
has difficulty using Google Maps to recognize roads. 
The person needs to learn how to navigate using 
Google Maps. The person can read both Bengali and 
English.
 An adult person who can 
read both Bangla and 
English and has access 
to a smartphone
 Our task is to create digital content related to the chosen problem and gift it to some
one who belongs to the specified target group. Considering the above problems and 
the necessity of the content, we realize that our gift will be in the form of informative 
digital content.
 Now, our teacher will divide us into groups and we will discuss our ideas for the content 
we want to create. We will record all our thoughts and ideas in the designated space.
 The kind of content we think we can create 
........................................................................................................................................
 ........................................................................................................................................
 ........................................................................................................................................
 18
 Digital Solutions through Digital Gifts
Digital Techonology
 Preparation for the next session: In the time we have before the next session, we will 
think about what kind of content our target audience will find useful, or like. If possible, 
we will observe and try to talk to a person who belongs to our target group. 
 Session- 3: Plan to Create Digital Gifts
 We have the opportunity to create digital gifts that can solve specific problems for our 
target audience. Isn’t that exciting? By creating useful content, we have the potential to 
benefit many people in the future. Now that we have identified our problem and target 
group, it’s time to decide what type of digital content we want to create. We will come 
up with the plan together as a group.
 Creating digital content doesn’t require much, we can create something remarkable 
with the resources we already possess. We can use simple ideas and the devices we 
already have, such as a feature phone, smartphone, camera, computer, or audio recorder 
to create a useful and creative content. We need not buy anything to do the work.
 Digital gifts can take various forms, such as creating a recorded 
audio of a rhyme, drawing a picture with a description, writing 
a slogan like a poem and recording it in audio or video format, 
taking screenshots or screen recordings with accompanying 
descriptions, and more.
 These examples are provided to help us understand the possibilities, but we have the 
freedom to create content in our unique ways.
 Description of our planned content:
 19
 Academic Year 2024
Digital Solutions through Digital Gifts
 Specific duties that I will perform while working in the team:
 Academic Year 2024
 20
Digital Techonology
 Session- 4: Creating Digital Contents 
Today, in our session, we will focus on creating digital gifts. We can work on these 
tasks either in the classroom, computer lab, or on school grounds with the assistance 
of our teacher.
 21
 Academic Year 2024
Digital Solutions through Digital Gifts
 Session- 5: Presenting the Final Content 
We will present the gifts that we have made in the class and evaluate each other’s gifts. 
Peer review:
 Name of team
 Why I liked their work
 After our presentation, with the guidance of our teacher, we will deliver the gifts to 
our target audience. This can be done either through email or a pen drive.
 Parent’s Assessment:
 Academic Year 2024
 We will also show our content to our parents. If it’s not possible to take the content 
home, the teacher will present it to parents during the next parent meeting. Parents will 
then fill in the stars below to rate the content. They can give three stars if they really 
like it, two stars if they like it to a fair extent, and one star if they think the content 
requires more improvement.