 Learning 
Experience 
3
 Making Identities through Information 
Technology
 We have different identities in different areas in real life. We have an identity at our 
school or institution and another identity in our personal life or friend circle. We have 
identities in another world, which is known as virtual world. Virtual world is where 
no one sees me but realises my digital presence. Here no work can be done without 
giving our identities. First we have to give or create our identities and move on to the 
next step in any website. For this we should know how to create virtual identities, what 
information should be provided for it or what are its moral aspects. We will experience 
this through some activities in the next few sessions.
 Session-1: Concept of Virtual Identity
 Dear students, greetings! Almost everyone has some previous experience about our 
virtual identities. Just we did not know exactly this was a virtual identity. We provide 
so much information in many places, later we see it on various websites. We have to 
create an account at first to receive any necessary service. For that, we need to register 
on the website of the service provider. We can see a virtual identity in the picture below 
which is based on the given information. Now let’s find out what information is given 
in this virtual identity…
 Academic Yeear 2024
 38
Alina
 Personal Information
 Name:           Alina Kabir
 ID/Roll No: 00226650
 Mother’s Name: Ferdous Ara Ima
 Father’s Name: Humayun Kabir
 Date of Birth: 01/01/2010
 Address: Kapashia, Gazipur
 Name of School: Chinaduli High School
 Class: 7th
 Hobby: Painting
 Contact: kabir@email.com
 Let’s write the information Alina has revealed in the box above in the table below:
 Father’s Name
 Date of Birth
 39
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Making Identities through Information Technology
Virtual Identity
 A virtual identity is some information shared about us which is an identity to be 
used in digital communication or social media. It is like our roll number. It is not my 
name or photo. But when used in a certain context, I can be identified. Sometimes we 
introduce ourselves under pseudonyms and do not reveal our real identity directly. 
Now guess that my favourite animal is lion. I always give the picture of a lion as my 
identity on the school wall magazine. Gradually everyone will start to know me with 
this picture. This is a kind of virtual identity. But since in digital media everything is 
fast and on a larger scale, this process of recognition will not be slow there. Rather it 
will spread among many people very fast. So it is better to think before doing anything 
there. In some cases, we cannot give false or fake identity as it can get us into trouble. 
For example, I have registered myself as a client of a government service providing 
organisation. If I use pseudonym or a fake photo there, they may not provide me the 
service after information verification. So we need to give our real identity in some 
context. Again, personal information should not be given without a trusted website.
 [Exercise]
 We will do an activity now. There are pictures of two professionals given below.
 Doctor Teacher
 We will be divided into six groups and each group will write about one of the 
professionals above. We will write what we know about them and what we do not. We 
will write the points in the table below: 
40
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Digital Technology
Known Unknown
 1.  Name 1. Passport number 
2.  2.  
3.  3.  
4.  4.  
5.  5.  
By doing the above activity, we have learned that some profile information of the famous 
people is available in virtual world. But we cannot find some personal information 
about them. We should not also add a lot of such information to our virtual identity.
 41
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Making Identities through Information Technology
Session-2: Creating Own Virtual Identity
 Nowadays everyone has a virtual identity. Everyone has a social, family or education 
oriented identity or profile. Some have two or three profiles or identities. Sometimes 
creating a profile is a prerequisite to accessing a service. So in this session we will 
experience how to create a profile considering moral aspects.
 The school of Araf has decided that monthly 
payment would be made through a bank’s 
online app. For this, his father has to open 
an account by giving different information. 
After logging in, some information about 
his father can be seen in the profile. While 
taking e-services from government or 
e-commerce from private organizations,
 they want to know who wants this service. Then those organisations should create a 
virtual identity on their websites. In many places it is called an account. It is slightly 
like a bank account. It is a rule to provide the least information as required. Additional 
information should never be given. The greatest asset of the virtual world is your 
personal information. For example, like I do not stand at the outside door and announce 
in a microphone what is going on at my house every minute, I should not reveal in the 
virtual world what is happening in my personal life. Remember that, once I put 
information in digital media, it will remain exposed forever.
 We can create profile in two ways. We can create an identity for an organisation by 
providing its required information in order to take its services. And we can create our 
own profile to introduce ourselves in the virtual world. For this, I have to be cautious 
what information I can have in the virtual world. We have seen in the previous session 
that some information can be shared with others and some cannot. When we grow a bit 
older, we can create our own profile through professional or social media and share it 
with others. Publishing to everyone is called public sharing. And if we share absolutely 
personal information with a specific person, it is called private sharing. We can turn 
these options on or off. So we will take this action as per needs. If there is no such rule, 
we can use avatars instead of publishing our pictures in the virtual world.
 42
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Digital Technology
Making Identities through Information Technology
 An avatar is the symbolic image used for virtual identity instead of one’s own image. 
Multiple avatars are given in some social media. We can use any one as we wish for 
our identities. Again, we can create an avatar ourselves.
 Let’s see the picture below. We can avail many types of government services by visiting 
this website.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Now let’s find where the word “registration” is in the above image and circle it. The 
following image will appear, if you click on this word “registration”.
 43
Digital Technology
 Here new account means creating a new virtual identity. Remember that providing 
false information to the government is punishable by law. That is, you have to give 
correct information in such websites.
 There are many such websites where we have to create an account or virtual identity 
before availing services. This is called virtual identity for receiving services.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 44
Making Identities through Information Technology
 Preparation for next session:
 If we want to introduce ourselves as per our choice to a website, we can create a design 
in advance for our identity page. Let’s create a virtual identity in the blank space of the 
next page with our information. We will give a self-drawn avatar instead of our picture.
 My School Name
 My Profile
 My Name
 What I like to do
 The tasks I have done well
 Academic Yeear 2024
 45
Digital Technology
 Session-3: Review of Virtual Identity
 In the previous session we have learned how to create a virtual identity. We also made 
a hand-written profile. Though there is not much difference between a hand-written 
profile and a virtual profile, the latter is open to everyone. So, we should present our 
virtual profile to everyone considering every factor. Three images of the virtual profile 
of Microsoft founder Bill Gates are given below. One is from Twitter, one LinkedIn and 
one from Facebook. Twitter, LinkedIn and Facebook are three different social media. 
We will find the comparison and differences of our hand-written identity by looking at 
any of these.
 It is the symbol to verify the 
profile. It is called verified sign.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 46
Let’s create a profile or virtual identity based on the information given above. Let’s 
practise creating a profile by taking screenshots of ‘Kishore Batayan’ which is created 
for students like our aged.
 Now let’s try to find the answers to the following questions through discussion in 
groups:
 1. When was Bill Gates profile opened?
 Answer:
 2. How many people are following the profile of Bill Gates?
 Answer:
 3. How do you know that this is his real profile or identity?
 Answer:
 4. What are his other profiles except this one?
 Answer:
 5. What are the other organisations of Bill Gates in addition to Microsoft?
 Answer:
 47
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Making Identities through Information Technology
Digital Technology
 For personal security, won’t give phone number here.
 Remember that we will put the password as sample
 Here. During online registration, won’t use this. 
Academic Yeear 2024
 48
Making Identities through Information Technology
 Session-4: Let’s Create a Virtual Identity for Myself
 Today we will register for Kishore Batayan. We will complete the registration process 
by using the information we wrote on our book yesterday.
 Ethical aspects of using virtual identities
 On many occasions, we can see that someone we know has mistakenly provided 
excessive personal information to their virtual profile. It means we have learning 
something about them through the digital platform that we were not supposed to 
know. Does that mean we will misuse that information? Never! We will inform them 
safely to delete the information. Will we ever claim ourselves as something which 
we are not actually? Firstly, once false or exaggerated information about oneself 
goes to digital media, it is nearly impossible to remove that. So we will not do 
anything which will haunt us even after thirty to forty years.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 49
Digital Technology
 I have to edit the information to provide more details after registering or signing up on 
Kishore Batayan or konnect. It can be seen in the next picture what information should 
be provided. We will provide information accordingly.
 We have to make virtual identities to get more services like Kishore Batayan. We 
need to create virtual identities by providing our information in various websites for 
e-commerce or citizen services. We need to provide accurate information and pictures 
on secure websites but in cases where it is not applicable, it is not right to reveal all 
your identity. It is important to make our virtual identity secure as there are many media 
where giving all information is risky.