 Learning Experience-1
 A problem is not a bother, 
let us solve it together
 We face different problems every day, most of which we can solve by having proper 
information. At the very beginning of digital technology studies, we will find some 
problems around us. We will also try to find solutions for them by having proper 
information and make others aware.
 Session-1: Let’s find out a daily-life problem
 Discuss with your friend about what problems you have faced in last one week. Identify 
10 problems together. We said that we would solve our problems through information. 
So, first we will discuss what is information, what is the source of information and 
different ways to search for it.
 Your name, age, height, what school do you go to, 
what class are you in - all these are information. 
Look around you. Everyone is your friend. 
You have something in common with them and 
you have some differences too. Let’s get some 
information quickly.
 Here is a table below to make it easier for you. 
You can collect information from a person in it.
 Table 1.1
 Name of the Form                                
First Survey of the First Class Session
 What is your birth month 
How many pets do you have at home?
 Who is your favourite athlete?
 Necessity of information: Information is needed in every step of our daily life. We 
look at the clock when we wake up and we check our school bags and routines before 
going to sleep - everything requires information. In everyday life, we have to make big 
or small decisions at every moment. We are not even aware of it most of the time. Let’s
 1
 Academic Year 2024
Academic Year 2024
 assume we have three routes leading from our home to school. We need information 
to decide which route we should take today to go to school. Another example can be, 
some of our friends have come home. We want to play a game together. If the weather 
is good, we will go and play in the field. If it rains, we will play at home. In that case, 
we will decide which game we should play depending on our number. 
What game we can play will also depend on the required tools and if we have them. So, 
what information do we need here? Weather information and the game tools we have.
 Let’s do some exercises. If you are asked from the previous example:
 You have to decide what to take in your bag before you go to school tomorrow.
 The information you need is which sessions will be held tomorrow.
 Your information source is your class/session routine.
 Let’s identify some problems. We need information to solve those. Let’s 
write down the proper source of information.
 Table 1.2
 Decision/Problem Information Needed Source of Information
 Example 1: What learn
ing materials will we 
take in the school bag 
for tomorrow’s session?
 What subjects will be 
taught in tomorrow’s 
session?
 My session routine
 Example 2: Which of the 
three roads from home 
to school should I take 
today?
 Which road is closed 
due to development 
work/Which road is 
under water/Which route 
has more traffic/ Which 
road takes less time?
 Television/newspaper/ 
Google Map/ opinion of 
someone who uses the 
road regularly.
 Example 3: A picnic is 
being arranged at the 
end of winter. TV news 
reports that it is raining 
in some districts. Now 
should the picnic date be 
postponed?  
Will it rain on the date 
of the picnic? 
Weather reports of TV/
 newspaper/Google 
Weather or other weath
er related apps/website. 
Example 4: Will you go 
on a tour during Pahela 
Baishakh?
 On which day is Pahela 
Baishakh this year?
 Bangladish’s Calendar.
 2
 A problem ia not a bother, let us solve it together
Digital Techonology
 5:
 6:
 From this exercise we have understood that we need different types 
of information depending on our problems or needs and different types of 
information have different sources.
 Preparation for next session and homework 
We have found out today that every day we face many small problems. We have 
to take decisions to solve them. We have learned that information helps us solve 
problems. After going home today, we will think about the problems around us 
related to our life. We have questions about those problems and can solve those if 
we have the right information. We will also discuss them with our family members
 We will discuss these problems at the next session in our classroom. 
If we do not understand the task, we can ask the teacher. 
Session- 2 : Found a problem, now time to find a solution!
 In our last session we realised that we need different types of information depending 
on the type of everyday problems. Do we remember we will solve a problem and make 
people around us aware by that solution? In today’s session we will try to understand 
where these solutions lie. Where is the information that we need now? What are the 
sources? 
Sources of information can be of two kinds - 
1. 
Human source
 2. 
Non-human source
 Suppose someone came to your house and informed about you the necessity 
of vaccination. Your parents received information in their phones when and 
where to get the vaccines. Here the person who came to your house is a hu
man source. The mobile phone is the non-human source. 
A human source is when a human being actively gives you information. 
A non-human source is when you have to observe actively to get the information. 
3
 Academic Year 2024
A problem ia not a bother, let us solve it together
 Do we know that information is analysed differently while surveying or preparing 
news? In this case, the sources of information can be divided into two other kinds. 
They are- 
1.Primary or main source
 2.Secondary or second-hand source.
 From the names of information ‘human source’ and ‘non-human source’, we can as
sume which source is human and which is non-human. Human sources can be of dif
ferent types. Let’s take a look into the human sources in the Cell below and think if we 
have ever taken information from any of these sources. 
Cell 1.1
 1.Expert: An expert has enough knowledge about the subject, from which you are 
looking for information. For example, if health related information is needed, there is a 
specialised doctor. For agricultural information there is upazila agricultural specialists.
 2.Experienced person: One who has experience in the field from where information 
is needed. Such as a farmer for agricultural information or a patient for a certain disease.
 3.Witness: Someone who witnessed an incident. For example, in case of information 
about the Liberation War, a freedom fighter can be a source.
 4.Victim: Someone who has suffered directly because of an incident you are searching 
information for. If the subject is child marriage, the victim bride or her guardians will be 
the source. 
Let’s fill up the cell together.
 Cell: 1.2
 Academic Year 2024
 Using internet Jewel searched 
with in his father’s help  
whether there is Sheikh Russel Dig
ital Lab in his area where he could 
learn computer operation. Now he 
got information from a website or 
the internet which became his source 
of necessary information. What type 
of source is this?
 4
 Answer: Non-human source.
Digital Techonology
 Mitu asked her mother if man
goes were sold in the market. Her 
mother answered. What type of 
source is this?
 Answer: Human source.
 Can it be said after further think
ing what type of source is moth
er? (Put a tick mark)
 Expert/ Experienced/Witness/
 Victim
 Mitu and her friends decided to devel
op a garden in their school. But they do 
not know which plants are suitable for 
local soil and weather or how to take 
care of plants. Their school gardener 
helped them with necessary informa
tion. What kind of source is the school 
gardener?
 Answer: Human source.
 Can it be said after further thinking 
what type of source is the gardener? 
(Put a tick mark)
 Expert/ Experienced/Witness/Victim
 5
 On the way to school, you no
ticed a poster about coronavirus. 
You had some questions in your 
mind regarding coronavirus. You 
got your answers from reading the 
poster. What kind of source was 
the poster?
 Answer: ?
 Academic Year 2024
A problem ia not a bother, let us solve it together
 Things to keep in mind while searching for information in Internet
 If you have access to Internet and family’s permission to use it, you can use it to search 
for information. But remember, do not be sad if you do not have access to the inter
net. Even without the internet we can learn about this topic. Those who invented this 
technology did not have access to it at your age. Some of you may invent the future 
technologies that we cannot even imagine right now. 
We usually use search engines to search for information in the internet. Search engine 
is a medium by which we can find the necessary information from the internet. Google 
is the most popular search engine. There are also Bing, Bajdu, Yahoo!, Yandex,
 Ask.com, etc.
 Keyword: From its vast 
collection of information, 
internet uses keywords 
to find information for 
us. Let’s assume, I want 
to know the name of the 
smallest river in Ban
gladesh. ‘Bangladesh’, 
‘small’ and ‘river’ are the 
keywords in this sentence. 
We can test if we want. 
The same information ap
pears if we search either 
by the whole sentence or 
the three words. So, if you 
search by a precise key
word, you will get quick 
and effective information. 
Academic Year 2024
 After the search you will see the result of plenty of 
websites or suggestions. In most cases you will get 
Wikipedia first. Not all the information in Wikipe
dia is reliable. So, after getting information from 
Wikipedia, you should browse few other websites 
to check if everyone is giving the same informa
tion.
 Besides information, commercial websites also ap
pear often. You will not find necessary information 
if you click those links.
 It is important to determine which website to take 
information from. If you need any information 
about Bangladesh, it will be smart to get it from the 
government website Bangladesh National Portal. If 
you do not find it in the information Portal, check 
if it is available in the website of any reliable news 
media or in any other reliable website
 It is also important to check when the information 
was last published in the website. The information 
might be so outdated that it won’t be effective any
more.
 Homework: To solve the problem we found out last time as our homework, we 
will find out what might be the source of information (newspaper/television/internet/
 6
 books/any persons, etc.) to do it.
The topic should be a little unique or different. 
We will select a topic after being certain that it has lot of informa  
tion and we can find it.
 We will not have a lot of time in our hands to search for information  
on the topic and arrange to present them. We will present it after an  
other session, so we should not choose a complicated topic.
 We should consider that we do not have to spend any money while   
doing this work. 
Finally, we will inform our teacher which topic we have selected   
and finalise it after taking his/her opinion.
 7
 Things to be prioritised while selecting a topic
 Cell: 1.3
 Now we will be divided into groups and each group will choose one problem. Let’s 
read Cell 1.3 before proceeding
 In our last session we were supposed to find a problem of our daily life and sources 
of information related to it. In today’s session we will sort out the problems in order 
of their importance. We will also try to profoundly understand a certain problem and 
plan to solve it. We will be divided into groups to do these tasks. There is nothing more 
delightful than working in a group together. All the great deeds of the world are accom
plished through cooperation, not competition. 
Session- 3 : Let’s decide as a group which problem we want 
 to solve
 Digital Techonology
 Academic Year 2024
A problem ia not a bother, let us solve it together
 Group discussion and finalising problem/topic
 After deciding the problem or topic to work about, we will distribute the tasks among 
us in the group. We will decide who will search for which information. 
Let us fill up up the table below for our own group:
 Table: 1.3
 Name of the group
 Selected problem to deal with
 Possible list of sources of  
information for the problem
 Preparation
 When we take interviews of an experienced person, expert, witness 
or a victim for necessary information, we must ensure that their privacy is 
protected.
 First we will take their permission if they want to talk/provide information. 
If they are willing, we will assure them that they can keep their identity secret if they 
want. We will ask them if they want to keep their identities secret. If they want to 
do that, we will present their quotation/statement/speech while writing, speaking or 
publishing it  in this way- ‘A doctor who does not want to be named said…’ 
Academic Year 2024
 Homework: We have probably collected some information as a group while 
working in the classroom. As homework, we will distribute the work among us who 
will look for which parts of the information. The next day we will bring the respective 
information in the classroom.
 8
Digital Techonology
 Session- 4: Playing with Key – Word
 We have identified the problem our team wants to work on and gathered some 
information. In the second session, we learned about the aspects we need to consider 
when gathering information from the internet. One of the techniques mentioned was 
using keywords for searching. Today, let’s play a keyword game!
 Rules of the game: The game will be played with our teacher. The teacher will 
think a famous person, place, movie, book, or country. However, teacher will not 
inform us about it. We will ask various questions one by one to discover who or 
what the teacher has in mind. The main rule of the game is that the teacher can only 
answer with “yes” or “no,” and we can ask a maximum of 20 (twenty) questions. 
This means we need to ask questions in such a way that the teacher can respond 
with either “yes” or “no.” At the beginning of the game, the teacher will announce 
whether they have thought a person, a movie, or something else.
 Example of the game: Let’s imagine that our teacher has thought “Rabindranath 
Tagore”. The teacher announces, “I have thought a famous person.” Now it’s time 
for us to ask questions.
 1. Student: Is the person a woman? 
Teacher: No.
 2. Student: Is the person alive? 
Teacher: No.
 3. Student: Is the person a politician? 
Teacher: No.
 4. Student: Is the person a writer? 
Teacher: Yes.
 5. Student: Was the person born in Bangladesh? 
Teacher: No.
 6. Student: Did the person write in Bengla? 
Teacher: Yes.
 7. Student: Did the person write any novel? 
Teacher: Yes.
 8. Student: Did the person also write poetry? 
Teacher: Yes.
 9. Student: Is the person the author of the poetry collection ‘Geetanjali’? 
Teacher: Yes.
 We got our answer “Rabindranath Tagore.”
 9
 Academic Year 2024
A problem ia not a bother, let us solve it together
 Let’s play the game with our teacher!  We can 
give the game a name of our choice. 
If we think about it a little, we can understand that 
the internet works in a similar way to this game. 
It retrieves the necessary information for us based 
on keywords from a vast amount of data. If we 
look at the example of the game above, we could 
have obtained the answer by asking the internet 
the question no. 9, “Who wrote ‘Geetanjali’?” So, 
if we can ask the internet appropriate questions, 
we can obtain the answers more easily. 
Cell: 1.4
 We can give the game 
a name of our choice. 
Now we can learn some rules for searching or conducting searches on the internet:
 1. If we enclose the word or phrase we are searching for within quotation marks 
(‘ ‘), we will easily find the desired results.
 2. We can also search by file type. For example, if I want to search for a PDF file, I 
can type ‘Key-word .PDF’ and it will show websites that have PDF files.
 3. After conducting a search, if we come across a webpage that seems to have 
the information we need, but we cannot find it easily due to large amount of 
information, we can use the keyboard combination of Ctrl + F. This will bring 
up a search bar. We can then type the word we are looking for and press Enter, 
and it will highlight the occurrences of that word on the webpage.
 4. If we want information about a specific time, we can specify the date. For 
example, ‘March 1-10, 2020 Bangladesh.’
 5. If we are searching for a specific word or phrase but only remember part of it, 
we can use ** after the partial word. It will suggest possible completions.
 6. Additionally, we can search for images, videos, news, etc., based on categories or 
classifications. Preparation for next session:
 For the preparation of the upcoming session: 
Preparing for the next session. 
Academic Year 2024
 We will plan for the presentation. Regarding the topic, we will focus on presenting it 
in a concise manner and ensuring that our team can grasp the subject matter. In this 
regard, we can utilize materials such as slides, posters, and PowerPoint presentations 
to deliver the content.
 Topics will be included in our presentation: Identified problem, problem-solving, and 
credible sources of information.
 10
Digital Techonology
 Session- 5 and 6: Let us present the problem together in the 
group
 We are very close to our target. 
We have solved the problem 
with appropriate information. 
Now our goal is to raise aware
ness about the problem among 
the people around us. But before 
that, we will present the problem 
in front of us so that we can ap
preciate our own work and cor
rect the mistakes, if any. We will 
present our topics in the class
room in groups in today’s and 
tomorrow’s sessions. If the num
ber of groups in the classroom is 
less, the presentations may be 
done in one day.
 Things to notice before the presentation:
 In today’s session we will evaluate every group. Our teacher has an 
evaluation table. We will get that from him/her and fill up one for 
every group. If we are five groups in the classroom, each group will 
evaluate four other groups. We will write the name of the group that 
we are evaluating on top of the evaluation table.  
We will ensure that every member of the group has a chance to present. 
If any member of the group feels shy to present or makes mistakes 
during presentation, we will not make fun of them. We must remember 
that there is no right or wrong in the classroom. If there is a mistake, 
we will help each other to correct it.
 Academic Year 2024
 11
A problem ia not a bother, let us solve it together
 Preparation for next session:
 We have found a solution to our selected problem and presented it. During 
the process, we have even corrected some of the mistakes that we had. We 
have found solutions to problems that other people face as well. If so, it 
is our duty to inform the solutions to other people. In that case, they can 
overcome the problems in future. In the next session we will decide how 
we want to inform the solutions to people around us, friends, university’s 
senior brothers and sisters, family members and relatives and make them 
aware. We can make beautiful awareness-raising posters, compose nursery 
rhymes, draw cartoon/comic strips, write short stories. Each group will fi
nalise a different awareness-raising material in the next session. So, today 
we will decide group-wise what material we want to make and distribute 
the work. We must prepare most of the materials before the next session. 
We will finalise our materials together in the classroom after taking opin
ions of our teacher. 
Session- 7: We found a solution ourselves, now time to make 
others aware
 We are almost at the end of our target. Today we will finalise our awareness raising ma
terials in groups in the classroom. We will also try to prepare most of the materials. We 
will notice that everyone should enjoy our material with an interest. At the same time, 
they should be aware about the topic. When the materials are finalised with the help 
of the teacher, we will fix the time and venue for presentation. It might be the school 
assembly, any other classroom (7 to 10), your home or any other place. In consultation 
with the teacher, we will decide where and before whom the presentation will be most 
effective and amusing. But the presentation must happen outside the classroom.
 Academic Year 2024
 The teacher will give us a chart, which will be filled up by those who have 
seen our materials.  We will take the chart from the teacher. Each group will 
get the forms filled by at least five members from the audience and submit it 
to the teacher next session.
 12
Academic Year 2024
 Session- 8: Let’s make a guideline for ourselves
 We have gathered new experiences in the last 6/7 sessions. We have learned new things 
through these experiences. Now we can say that if we know the right way and have the 
right information, we can solve many problems. And if we work together, it becomes 
fun. We have learned many new things while getting these experiences which will 
come in handy later on in our lives. Now along with our friends we will list the new 
experiences we had and how we can use them in our lives. This will be a guideline for 
us, made by us. 
One or two of us will take the responsibility to write everyone’s opinions on board, 
flipchart or a piece of paper. Some examples are given below for the sake of discussion: 
 Table 1.5
 Earned Experience How we can use it later
 1.Understanding 
what will be the ap
propriate source has 
taken a lot of time.
 1. We will ask the teacher, elder brothers or sisters or relatives 
what can be an appropriate source.
 2. We will select such a topic that has enough information from 
multiple sources. If one source fails, we will try another source.  
3. 
4. 
2. We took wrong 
information while 
searching for it in 
the internet.
 1. We will take information from one website and crosscheck 
it with a few more sites to see if everyone is giving the same 
information.
 2. First of all, we will visit the government website or the 
website of the certain person, organisation or state whose 
information we are looking for. 
3. We will check if the website we are taking information 
from provides same type of information or different types of 
information in different times. If it exaggerates information to 
make it more attractive, we will not take anything from it. 
4. 
5. 
13
 Digital Techonology
A problem ia not a bother, let us solve it together
 From the classroom discussion, we have already found several ways to correct our mis
takes. Now we will make a poster about information verification and responsible use 
of information. The poster will be made from the things we have identified in the table 
above. We will try to follow these rules made by us later
 In the poster, priority will be given on:
 1.What to do and not to do while collecting information. 
2.What to do and not to do while using information. 
We need to keep in mind that we will write the things we learned from          
this experience on the poster. We will not copy or memorise anything from 
anywhere to use it on the poster
 We can request our teacher to share our posters with the teachers of other 
schools. If our teacher can manage to collect the posters made by other 
class six students from different schools, it will be really a great learning 
experience for all of us.