 Learning Experience-3
 Our School Magazine
 We will make a school magazine in this learning experience. We will be divided into 
some groups and each group will select some topics to make the school magazine. We 
will write a report each on a certain topic at home and bring it to the class. We will 
analyse our reports properly, play some games, do some fun activities while making 
the magazine. Besides these, if we use writing, songs, poems or pictures by others in 
the magazine, we will give them due credit. We must have permission before we use 
them. If we cannot get permission, the at least we should mention their names. This is 
a very good practice.
 Do we know how to make a school magazine? Or how does a school magazine look? 
It does not matter if we do not have any idea. While making the school magazine, 
our teachers will give us necessary instructions. Before that, let us see what a school 
magazine looks like. See the picture below. It is of a school magazine. It contains 
stories, poems, tales and reports written by the school students. 
We will have to go through some short class and home activities to create a beautiful 
school magazine like this. Only then can we make a beautiful school magazine following 
all the rules and regulations. After the magazine is ready, we all can present it to our 
headteacher or the head of the school management committee or the owner of the book 
shop near our school
 sports
 puzzle
 ফ
 ুলকলল
 poem
 science
 quiz
 23
 Academic Year 2024
Academic Year 2024
 24
 We need to make a group of 5-8 members. We can work in the same  
Gift Box group if we want.
 Each group will select a theme.
 We will write a one-page report on the theme. 
We will attach story/picture/poem or information of others in the re  
port. We will use our own opinions to write the report. 
We can take support from our family, neighbours, teachers, senior   
students, digital media, union resource centres or any other    
source to write the report.
 We will give a name/title to the report. 
Guidelines to write a report
 Preparing a report will be the first step of making the school magazine. We have to 
write the report on one page of our notebook. The guideline is given here for our con
venience.
 Our school magazine
  Session- 1: Play a game, read a report
Digital Techonology
 Surely, we have written the report following the teacher’s instruction. We need to 
remember, the written report should be kept in the classroom until our school magazine 
is complete. Let us write the title of our report in the cell below.
 Shopping Game: Now there will be a fun game in the classroom. We can ask the 
teacher to learn about the game. We all have to play the game together. We have to 
maintain discipline and show our respect to each other while playing the game. While 
playing the game, we can evaluate one of the reports we have seen with his/her name 
and some questions. We can use tick marks in the chart below to evaluate the classmate’s 
report. We can also paste or draw his/her photo on the following circle of the report we 
have just evaluated.
 Did the class
mate use his/
 her own name 
in the report?
 While using 
someone else’s 
writings/
 poems, did 
the classmate 
mention their 
names?
 While using 
photographs 
taken by 
others, did 
the classmate 
mention their 
names?
 My classmate Yes        No Yes        No Yes        No
 While using 
information from 
a human source, 
did the classmate 
mention the 
individual’s or 
organisation’s 
name?
 Yes        No
 Academic Year 2024
 25
Our school magazine
 We have certainly noticed that the teacher has marked something important from our 
answers. Let us write in the table belowe the thing the teacher has marked as important. 
Preparatory work for the next session
 As part of preparatory work for the next session, we have to find out why the teacher 
has said it is very important to mention names of an individual or organisation while 
using their information. We can find out the reason behind it with the help of our school 
teachers or senior students. Let us write down the reasons in the box below.
 In our opinion, why the marked thing is important
 Academic Year 2024
 26
Digital Techonology
 Session- 2: Let’s learn about others’ property, be aware
 We exchanged reports with our classmates in the last session. We also learned through 
a questionnaire that when we want to use texts/image/information of an individual or 
an organisation, we should give them due credit. We should keep this in mind when 
we make our school magazine. The teacher will ask many of us for answers from our 
homework in this session. That is, s/he will ask for the reason why it is important to 
mention someone’s name while using something made by them. We can write down 
some of the reasons mentioned by our classmates in the cell below.
 Answers by classmates
 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Let’s read the next part. 
When someone applies their intelligence and creativity to produce something, it is 
simply called their intellectual property. For example, a story written, a picture drawn 
or a mobile phone application made by someone, etc. 
Now the question may arise in our mind that by property we mean cash, land, furniture, 
etc. Then how can a story, poem or photo be property? It is because an individual or an 
organisation has created these with their intellect and ideas and they can earn money 
by selling these. 
We need to learn about two ideas here. 
1.Copyright   2. Patent
 Copyright means no-one other than the creator of a content/product is allowed to copy 
it. For example, if a writer writes a story and copyrights it, it means no one except him 
can publish it.
 Patent means, people other than the creator can use the created thing. But in that 
case, the creator’s name has to be mentioned and payment must be made for business 
purposes. For example, a scientist has invented a formula that can control mosquito 
population. If anyone else wants to use this formula for industrial purpose he/she has to 
pay the scientist and mention his/her name also.
 Academic Year 2024
 27
Academic Year 2024
 28
 Answer: 
Name of the book: Amar Bond
hu Rashed
 Read by: Abdur Rahman
 Written by: Muhammed Zafar 
Iqbal
 Is this book intellectual proper
ty? 
If yes, whose intellectual prop
erty?
 Is the cover of the book intellec
tual property?
 This picture is called the 
‘Monalisa’. This was painted 
by Leonardo da Vinci. Mr. 
Rahim is using a copy of the 
picture.
 Here, is this picture intellec
tual property? If yes, whom 
intellectual property it is?
 Answer: This is 
intellectual property 
and it belongs to 
Leonardo da Vinci. 
Exercise:
 property.
 Let us do some exercise on which can be called intellectual property and which cannot. 
There are some pictures below. There are some assumptions given beside the pictures. 
We have to see the pictures, read the assumptions and put our answer in the next col
umn. Let’s discuss the picture with our classmate for 2 minutes and then complete the 
task. 
Let’s think little differently. Say, you have an idea of a fun story. It has not yet become 
intellectual property. A thought becomes intellectual property when it is published. If 
it is not published, no-one in the society can use it. So, it does not add any value to the 
society or economy. When someone uses their skill, intellect and creativity to create an 
asset and publishes it for the benefit of people and society, then it is called intellectual 
Our school magazine
29
 We can compare our answers with our classmates. Surely, we 
have all the correct answers! Excellent! Not a problem if not. 
We should congratulate ourselves if we can do the task right. 
Let’s paint the star here in colours of our own choice and gift 
it to ourselves.
 Academic Year 2024
 Answer:
 During the paddy season, a farmer grows paddy 
here. Subrata Barua is the owner of the land. Is 
this crop land intellectual property? 
If yes, whose intellectual property?
 This mobile phone set is 
manufactured by a company. Alam 
Mobile Phone Store sells it. Is this 
phone intellectual property? If 
yes, whose intellectual property?
 Answer:
 Digital Techonology
Academic Year 2024
 30
 Detailed information on the chit 
Detailed information on the chit 
While playing the game we have 
found some chits. Let’s write down 
what and how many notes we all 
have found together beside the chits 
below. We can add extra pages if 
needed.
 Let’s write the name of the game 
We got idea about intellectual property and exercised it in the last session. This idea 
of intellectual property will help us a lot in making our school magazine. Now we will 
play a game to understand the types of intellectual property. Let’s learn from our teach
er the name and how to play the game.
 Our school magazine
 Session- 3: Treasure hunt 
31
 We will notice that while searching and finding the chits, we and our classmates are 
getting ideas about different types of intellectual property. Let’s now match it with the 
report we prepared for the first session and find out how many types of intellectual 
property we used in it. Different types of intellectual property are described in details 
in a box below to match with our report. If we cannot finish this task in the classroom, 
we may take help of our guardians or senior family members at home. And if we do it 
in the classroom, we can take help from the teacher and our classmates. 
Academic Year 2024
 Detailed information on the chit 
Detailed information on the chit 
Detailed information on the chit 
Detailed information on the chit 
Digital Techonology
Academic Year 2024
 32
 property types are reflected in our report
 Let’s now write down in the book below how many of these intellectual 
1.Art and literature related property or copyright: songs, stories, poems, dramas,  
movies, books, etc. 
2.Industry related or industrial property: company name, logo, package design, 
secret formula to make the products, etc.
 3.Geographical resources: resources that bear the unique identity of a country or 
geographical area, like, hilsha fish and jute of Bangladesh, etc. 
4.Scientific invention: Any scientific invention like invention of COVID vaccine, 
electricity, etc. 
Idea of the types of intellectual property
 Our school magazine
Let us now learn about copyright owner, rights of a copyright owner and what might 
happen if we do not mention them.
 33
 Academic Year 2024
 Answer:
 We found different types of intellectual property and got its idea through games in the 
last session. Now that all these have been revealed before us, what should we do while 
using intellectual property? We had written the answer before. Let’s put our answers 
below. 
 Session- 4: Give value to work, get value in return
 Digital Techonology
Our school magazine
 Mitu made a mobile phone application, by which people can locate the police 
around them and ask for support from the nearest policeperson. In order to 
launch the application, Mitu got a licence from the government that she de
veloped the app. It means the government has recognised her as the creator 
of the app. Mitu will be called the copyright owner of this application. As the 
copyright owner, Mitu has the complete right to determine who gets to use her 
application and who doesn’t. Besides, anyone who wants to use the applica
tion needs her permission. If anyone wants to recreate the app, they need her 
permission too. We should keep one thing in mind that only if someone wants 
to make something entirely like Mitu’s app, they need her permission. But if 
someone makes the same thing differently or adds more features, like locating 
nearby doctors alongside police, then they can do it.
 Now the point is, what can Mitu do if someone uses her intellectual property without 
her permission? She can collect evidence and use her licence to file a case with the 
court. The person will be punished on charge of stealing her intellectual property. Now 
tell me, what will happen to us if we use someone else’s intellectual property without 
their permission or use it by others’ name? Yes, we may be punished too. 
Let’s say, Jewel wrote a poem which is his intellectual property. What can he do to 
protect his rights? He wrote the poem in his notebook for its preservation but neither 
wrote his name or date nor published it. In this case Jewel cannot claim that it is his 
poem. If someone else claims that it is their poem, Jewel cannot say anything or ask 
for legal support.
 Academic Year 2024
 So, we can protect our intellectual property only when it is published. In some cases, 
we can register our intellectual property under the Bangladesh Copyright Act without 
publication. But it is difficult for you at this young age to go through such a huge pro
cess. So, let’s find an alternate. When we become the owner of intellectual property by 
clicking a photograph, writing a short drama or a poem, we will send it with our name 
and date to our friends or parents through email, SMS or letter. If someone ever claims 
that property’s ownership, we can prove that we have published it on an earlier date. 
34
Academic Year 2024
 Let us now do another exercise. It is about the harm to be done to copyright owners 
if we do not use their names. Let’s discuss it with our classmates sitting beside us and 
write down our assumptions in the cell below. 
Serial Types of copyright 
owners
 Types of harm
 1. Singer Singer will lose interest in singing. They will be victim 
of financial loss.
 2. Writer
 3. Researcher
 4.
 5.
 6.
 A sample report is given below so that we can understand how to mention the name of 
the copyright owners.  Parts of the text in the sample report are in orange colour which 
are mainly name and date. This is how to mention the copyright owner’s name in a 
report. But this report does not show how to write the names of the copyright owners 
of every intellectual property. If it is a poem, the poet’s name, if it is a painting, the 
artist’s name should be mentioned. If it is a formula, the scientist’s name and in case of 
a country’s product or national anthem, the country’s name should be mentioned too. 
35
 Digital Techonology
Our school magazine
 Sample report
 My experience of taking COVID-19 vaccine
 Anjana Ahsan
 December 5, 2021 
I first learned about coronavirus when our school 
was closed indefinitely through a notice. Most of 
my friends are my classmates. So I was very upset 
when suddenly I could not meet them anymore. But I 
learned some fun activities instead of sitting idle at home. 
For example, I can write with invisible ink by using lime juice. 
Image source:World 
Health Organization
 B e
sides this, I have finished reading ‘Dipu Number Two’ by Muhammed Zafar Iqbal 
and many other books. I wanted to read some more books but could not find them. 
When classes will resume, I’ll have to check if my friends have those. I have 
heard that the school will open very soon. We have been asked to get vaccines 
from the vaccine centre (Bangladesh Television 2021). I got my vaccine with my 
parents yesterday. I went to the centre following proper hygiene (Health Director
ate, 2021) and wearing a mask. My elder sister tried to scare me but I did not feel 
any pain. The needle was very thin too. I don’t have any problems today after the 
vaccination. I want to return to my school and meet my friends. I want to sing like 
Firoz Shai, “Ischool khuilachhe re mawla, ischool khuilachhe” [The school has 
opened, o Lord, the school has opened.]
 Preparation for the next session
 Academic Year 2024
 Let’s now find where the copyright owner’s name should be mentioned in our report 
and circle them. We have to find out the rightful owners of the copyrights we have 
circled and write them down in our reports. We will rewrite our reports if needed. This 
time, we will observe how the sample report uses the name of the copyright owner. 
To find the copyright owners’ names, we can get support from our family, neighbours, 
teachers, senior students, digital media, union resource centres or any other reliable 
sources. By rewriting the report and making the proper use of the copyright owners’ 
names, we are one step closer to our goal of making the school magazine
 36
Digital Techonology
 Session- 5: Make the school magazine!
 We will make the school magazine now. At the beginning of this learning experience, 
we selected our theme and were divided into groups to make the magazine. We will sit 
in our own groups and make the magazine by our prepared reports. We have to follow 
the guidelines below the make the school magazine:
 The school magazine will be created in participation of all stu  
dents. Students of all sexes as well as mentally and physically   
challenged ones will take part
 
Each group will make materials based on their selected themes. Ma  
terials may consist of different pieces of information, photographs,   
stories, poems, reports, etc.
 The school magazine will be a compilation of every group’s works. 
The school magazine should have a relevant name or title.  
Some contents of the school magazine will be created by the stu  
dents and some will be collected from different sources.
 Both types of contents will mention the copyright owners. 
A separate section/page will be dedicated for the names of all the   
copyright owners’ names. This section can be named as List/Identity  
of Copyright Owners.
 Academic Year 2024
 37
Our school magazine
 Now we can take a photo of the final school magazine and paste it below. If we cannot 
do it, then we can draw the picture of the cover page here. 
Many thanks to you for following the guidelines and creating such a beautiful maga
zine. After the school magazine is prepared, we can gift it to our headteacher, head of 
the school management committee or to owner of the nearest bookshop.
 Academic Year 2024
 In this learning experience, we have selected a theme as a group and each member of 
the group collected information, photos and wrote a report on that theme with their 
own opinions. We observed each other’s reports and realised that we should mention 
the names of people if we use their information. After that, through a fun game we have 
got the ideas of different types of intellectual property, how to mention the name of the 
property owner and what harm can we do if we do not mention the names. Then we 
wrote our reports to include the names of the copyright owners and made our school 
magazine as a theme. We have realised that it is