Page Number: 16
Chapter Title: E-mails
Section Title: 16/1: How to Write

We write and send various types of e-mails every day. They may be friendly,
professional, resumes, planning for events etc. Writing an effective e-mail is
indeed very important.
How to get attention
It is important to get the receiver to read your e-mail; it is also important to get
the e-mail noticed by the receiver, and then keep the receiver engaged till s/he
finishes reading it. Here are some tips for you for writing an effective e-mail.
Five tips for writing an effective e-mail
1. Clear purpose: It is important to know the purpose of your e-mail. The
receiver should be sure about the point.
2. Use the subject line wisely: Take the time to select a meaningful,
straightforward subject line that tells the reason for the e-mail clearly.
3. Make sure your identity: There are many cases where e-mails are ignored or
bypassed because the receiver is not familiar with the sender of the e-mail.
Take time to make sure that your full name is placed as the sender so that the
receiver will know who you are.
Avoid using initials or nicknames as many people tend to ignore e-mails that
are not sent with whole names which they can recognize.
4. Get to the point: Make sure your e-mails are concise.
People want to know what the e-mail is
about as soon as they open it. After a brief
greeting followed by a comma, make sure
the next few lines are related specifically to
the subject of the e-mail.


Page Number: 233
Chapter Title: E-mails

E-mails
If this is a reply to another e-mail, reply immediately to any questions posed in the original e-mail.

When composing the e-mail do not use unnecessary words. Short sentences and paragraphs are better than long ones. Use an active voice such as "We are sending your order today" instead of "Your order will be sent by us today."

5. Make sure your e-mail is readable: There is nothing more annoying than an e-mail that cannot be read for various reasons, whether it's because of poor grammar or spelling, or the use of inappropriate fonts and abbreviations, or even worse, an e-mail written in bright colors or all capital letters. It is always best to use the proper format when sending an e-mail.

Check your e-mail text before sending it, and keep the formatting simple.

Put a blank line between paragraphs.

Remember: An e-mail is a form of communication; it is not a piece of artwork.

Why e-mails are bypassed

After you send your e-mail, you might not receive an answer for a number of reasons.

In many cases, important e-mails are sometimes bypassed because the receiver simply looks at the subject and decides that it is not worth reading, or puts the e-mail aside for later reading (which may, or may not, happen!). This can be a problem if the information within the e-mail is essential.

To avoid e-mails being bypassed or deleted just follow the five key points. You will get the attention of the receiver.

Forma-30, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10


Page Number: 234
Chapter Title: English Grammar and Composition

Examples of some e-mails:
Example 1: An official note

[Email interface graphic]
Mail Address Book Calendar Preferences
Send Cancel Save Draft Add Attachment Spell Check Signature Options▾
To: Team Members
Cc:
Subject: Changes to Agenda
Times New Roman▾ 3 (12pt) § ▾ ≡ ▾ ≡ ▾ B I U ▾ A ▾ - ▾
Dear colleagues,

The following items will be on the agenda for our meeting on Friday:
• Changes to protocol
• New software installation
• Email monitoring policy

Failure to provide additional items by tomorrow will result in delay of the issue until proper, timely submissions are made.

~Margo

2023


Page Number: 235
Chapter Title: E-mails

Example 2: A personal mail

[Email interface graphic]
To: joan.smith@company.com
Send
Account
Subject: Thank You - Assistant Account Executive Interview

Dear Ms. Smith,

It was very enjoyable to speak with you today about the assistant account executive position at the Smith Agency.

The job seems to be an excellent match for my skills and interests. The creative approach to account management that you described confirmed my desire to work with you.

In addition to my enthusiasm, I will bring to the position strong writing skills, assertiveness, and the ability to encourage others to work cooperatively with the department.

I appreciate the time you took to interview me. I am very interested in working for you and look forward to hearing from you regarding this position.

Sincerely,

Jane Jones

Jane Jones
janejones@gmail.com
(555) 555-5555


Page 236
English Grammar and Composition

Example 3: An informal personal mail.

[Email screenshot]

From: Probir Chandra Roy <probi21@yahoo.com>
To: ritasarker23@gmail.com

Hello

Dear Rita

This is just to say you hello.
How are you doing in Bogra? Hope all is well.

I'm passing a very hectic time here. Working round the clock. To be honest, I need rest. I would like to go to the hilly region to make my holiday this time. You just come from Bogra and then together we will make it. How about all three hilly districts and Cox's Bazaar including the St. Martin's island and Maheshkhali?

Come soon.
Don't see you for ages. Missing you a lot.

Probir


