Page Number: 20
Chapter Title: Writing Summaries

20 Writing
Summaries

A summary is a restatement of someone else's words in your own words.
There are many different kinds of summaries, and they vary according to the
degree to which you interpret or analyze the source. Some are pages long,
while others are just one or two sentences. However, for all types of summary,
the writer is responsible for generally stating, in his or her own words, the
main information or argument of another writer.

Purposes of the Summary

Summaries benefit the reader because they offer a concise, general version of
the original information. For a busy reader, summaries provide quick
overviews of material. Summaries also show readers that you have
understood the general point of a text, and in this way, teachers can test your
knowledge. The process of summarizing someone else's material enables you
to understand that material better.

What and When to Summarize

Many student writers tend to quote when they should summarize material.
Quote only when the author expresses a point in a particularly telling or
interesting language. Otherwise, simply summarize. Use a summary to restate
an entire argument. Use a summary to present information.


Page Number: 279
Chapter Title: Writing Summaries

Writing Summaries

Example Summary
The following is a well-known fable by Aesop. After the fable, a typical summary of it is given.

The Lion and the Mouse
A lion was sleeping in his den one day, when a mischievous mouse for no reason at all ran across the outstretched paw and up the royal nose of the king of beasts, awakening from his nap. The mighty beast clapped his paw upon the nose thoroughly frightened little creature and would have made an end of him.

“Please,” squealed the mouse, “Don’t kill me. Forgive me this time, O King, and I shall never forget it. A day may come, who knows, when I may do you a good turn to repay your kindness.” The lion smiling at his little prisoner’s fright and amused by the thought that so small a creature ever could be of assistance to the king of beasts, let him go.

Not long afterward the lion, while ranging the forest for his prey, was caught in the net which the hunters had set to catch him. He let out a roar that echoed through the forest. Even the mouse heard it, and recognizing the voice of his former preserver and friend, ran to the spot where he lay tangled in the net of ropes.


Page Number: 280
English Grammar and Composition

“Well, your majesty”, said the mouse, “I know you did not believe me once
when I said I would return a kindness, but here is my chance.” And without
further ado he set to work to nibble with his sharp little teeth at the ropes that
bound the lion. Soon the lion was able to crawl out of the hunter’s snare and
be free.
(254 words)

Now read the summary:
Once, a playful mouse ran across the paw and up the nose of a sleeping lion.
The lion awoke, caught the mouse, and was about to kill him when the mouse
begged forgiveness, saying he might one day return the kindness. Amused, the
lion released him. Soon afterward, the lion was caught in a net set by hunters.
The mouse heard the lion’s roar, recognized his friend’s voice, and came to
help. His sharp teeth cut the ropes, setting the lion free.
(82 words)

Note: The writer of a summary must be able to tell the difference between a
main idea and a minor idea. In the above fable, the idea that the lion was
caught in a net is essential to the story, and is therefore, a main idea. But it is
not necessary or essential to know that when the lion was caught, or that he
had been ranging the forest for his prey.

Here is a one sentence summary of the fable:
A mouse, whose life had once been spared by a lion, later returned the
kindness by freeing the lion from a hunter’s net.

Activity 1
Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow.
There are many different reasons for reading. Sometimes we read for pleasure,
i.e., just to be entertained. Sometimes we read for information, or for direction
or instruction. Often we read to find out about the people around us and the
world we live in.
2023


Page Number: 281
Chapter Title: Writing Summaries

Writing Summaries

We read different kinds of material in different ways. We don't always read
everything at the same speed. With certain kinds of material we need to read
slowly and carefully, for example, when we are trying to understand difficult
ideas in a text like science or economics books. We also read directions and
instructions slowly and carefully. We usually read stories, magazines,
newspapers, where the material is usually written in an easily understandable
way, at a normal speed, neither too slow nor too fast. Whereas, when we read
something we have read before, or we know about, we usually read very
rapidly. A good reader suits his or her speed to what he or she reads.

Skimming and scanning are additional ways of helping us read more efficiently.
They save time. When we want to get the overall idea or the gist of a text, we
do not need to read every word in it. We can skim or look over the text quickly,
often read the first paragraph, then the first and last sentences of the other
paragraphs quickly. The final paragraph often summarizes the content. This
kind of reading is called skimming. On the other hand, when we want to find
specific information in a text, we scan the text searching for words or phrases
that would give us the information we need. This is called scanning.

1. Choose the best answer from the alternatives a, b, c, d given after
each question.

i) A good reader
    a) reads novels and poetry.
    b) reads before sleep.
    c) reads different kinds of material with ease.
    d) knows when to stop.

ii) You are preparing a dish from a cook book. You'd read the recipe.
    a) carefully.
    b) loudly.
    c) for fun.
    d) with a friend.

Forma-36, English Grammar and Composition, 9-10


Page Number: 282
English Grammar and Composition

iii) To find out the time of your favorite programme from a television guide, you'd
a) skim it. b) scan it.
c) see it. d) recite it.
iv) To get the gist of a text you'd
a) read it slowly. b) scan it.
c) skim it. d) discuss it.
v) You'd read a letter from a friend
a) by scanning. b) by skimming.
c) half-heartedly. d) normally.

2. Match a quotation from A with a reading purpose in B.

| A                                                              | B                 |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------- |
| i) "I love this poem!"                                          | i) For instruction. |
| ii) "Do you have the time table for the intercity train service?" | ii) For pleasure.  |
| iii) "Oh, dear! We should have put the eggs first!"              | iii) For knowledge. |
| iv) "At the moment I'm reading a book about the Greek civilization." | iv) For information. |

3. Write a summary of the above passage. Give the main ideas only.


Page Number: 284
English Grammar and Composition

1. Choose the best answer from the alternatives given below.
i) TN-3
a) is a monster.
b) works in deep mines.
c) has a complicated brain.
d) is an industrial model.
ii) The robot's brain works like
a) an old calculating machine.
b) a telephone.
c) a mechanical toy.
d) a switchboard with billions of connections.
iii) No one should be afraid of a robot because
a) it works under water.
b) it is just a calculating machine.
c) it has a complicated brain.
d) it can't be forced to harm a human being.

Activity 3
Fill in each of the blanks in the following summary of the passage with a suitable word.

A robot knows a language and enough of anything else to(a) ________ his job. TN-3 is the actual (b) ________ given to (c) ________ by the company. Tony has an (d) ________ brain which is (e) ________ ours. The robot manufacturers are now trying to bring robots to cities and (f) ________. That's why they are trying hard to make people (g) ________ that there is no reason to (h) ________ a robot.
2023


Page Number: 285
Chapter Title: Writing Summaries

Activity 4
Read the following selection. On your paper, write down the key words. Then
summarise the main ideas of the paragraph in a few sentences.

On farms and in small towns a hundred and fifty years ago, family members
learned to depend on each other for recreation and fun. There were no radios,
television sets, movie houses, sports stadiums, museums, so forth. Parents
and children had to invent their own pleasures. In the evenings after the work
was done, some members of the family read aloud to others. May be they
played games, or sometimes the whole family sang together. Modern families
do few things together as a group. Parents often go out together as a couple,
apart from their children. Each child has his or her friends. Some families have
more than one television set so that all the members do not even watch
television together. Instead of families making their own fun together,
individual members tend to go to recreational facilities for entertainment.


Page Number: 286
English Grammar and Composition

Activity 5
Read the following poem. Write a summary of the poem in 4 to 5 sentences.

Strange Dreams Come True
In years gone by
Men thought and dreamed
Of things that could not be-
Like the traveling
Up in the sky,
Or, deep down in the sea;
Or, watching things
That eyes can't see-
Too little- or too far-
Or hearing distant
Voice or sound,
No matter where you are.
But now we have
The radio,
And subs and cars and jets,
And phones and trains,
And microscopes
And television sets.
So many things
Have seemed absurd,
But in men's minds they grew-
The dreams which were
Impossible
Have in the end come true!
2023


