Learning 
Experience 
1
 Information in Digital Time
 Session-1: Appropriate Solution to Suitable Questions 
Do you think children or adults face more problems in life? Actually, both children 
and adults face different problems every day. Adults often handle bigger problems 
for us. But what if we try to solve both problems for the adults? Nowadays, with the 
help of digital technology, we can find solutions by gathering information. We have 
learned about information and its sources earlier. Now, we will learn how to find and 
use information to solve problems for the adults.
 To solve any problem, we need to dig deep and understand the reasons behind it. The 
best and easiest way to understand is by asking questions. Today, we will explore how 
to ask the right questions. Let’s read an incident before that
Academic Yeear 2024
 1
Shishir, who was in the third grade, went to a relative’s house with his mother for 
a wedding during the Eid holidays. The house they visited didn’t have anyone of 
Shishir’s age to play with. However, there was another relative’s house nearby with 
lots of kids of Shishir’s age and Shishir thought that it would be fun to play with 
them. Shishir had gone to that house a day earlier, so he decided to tell his mother 
about it and go there by himself. After having lunch, Shishir started walking towards 
the house. It should have taken him about 10 minutes to reach there, but he ended 
up walking for about 30 minutes and couldn’t find the house. Shishir realized that he 
had taken the wrong path and started crying. He didn’t remember his mother’s phone 
number or the name of the house they are staying, so he couldn’t ask anyone for 
help. At that moment, a boy studying in the university, approached him and asked, 
“what happened?” Shishir couldn’t answer at first but eventually managed to say 
through tears that he had forgotten the way. The boy then asked Shishir, “where were 
you trying to go and what the house looked like?” Shishir answered that he had come 
to a wedding with his mother, and the wedding house was located next to a railway 
line. The entrance gate for the wedding was set up next to the railway line, and it was 
a 10-minute distance from there to the other house. After hearing Shishir’s answers, 
the boy recognized the wedding house and guided Shishir to it. 
In this story about Shishir, we learned that asking the right questions is very important. 
To ask the right questions, we can use the 6W method. 
Who? What? Where?
 When? Why? How?
 By considering these 6W's when searching for information or presenting information, 
we can gather and share complete information.
 2
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Digital Technology
Information in Digital Time
 Now it's time for us to work on a project. We will form three groups with the help of our 
classroom teacher, and each group will focus on a different target group. We already 
know what a target group is from our 6th-grade lessons.
 The three target groups will be:
 1. Parents or guardians who are of their age
 2. Grandparents or relatives and neighbors who are of their age
 3. Teacher
 Our task is to find out what problems these target groups have faced in the past month 
and search for information to identify solutions for their problems. Once we find a 
solution, we will present it to them in a nice and interesting way.
 The problems our target groups face may be small, but finding solutions can greatly 
benefit them. For example:- Grandma might forget to take her medicine.- Dad's favorite tree could dry up if he goes on a trip for a few days. - The teacher's feet may hurt from standing for long time during classes.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 The examples given above are just for your understanding. Now we will go home and 
use the 6W questioning technique to find out the daily problems faced by the target 
groups that was assigned by our teacher.
 3
Homework:
 After getting back to home and we will try to find out the problems faced by each 
target group using the 6W questioning technique,. Remember, they might not 
initially talk about their problems or they might mention bigger issues. But by 
asking questions, we will uncover the core problems they are facing.
 Target group of my team
 Problems:
 4
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Digital Technology
Information in Digital Time
 Session-2: Classification of Problems
 If we think for a moment, we can realize that all the inventions in the world began with 
an attempt to solve problems. So, the first step to creating something new is to identify 
the problem.
 Today, we will gather all the problems from our homework and decide which ones 
we can start working on. To do this, we will use word processing to list down all the 
problems. 
Word processing is creating a document using a computer or mobile phone with the 
combination of alphabets, words, symbols, images, and more. Word processing can be 
done through various software like Microsoft Word, Notepad, LaTeX. Our teacher will 
guide us to use Microsoft Word to put our problems together and create a document. 
The teacher will help us through the process, and we can try it ourselves by following 
these step-by-step instructions:
 1. Start the computer and click 
the right button of the 
mouse. A box will appear 
with an option called "New."
 2. Move the cursor over "New," 
and another box will appear 
with a list of program 
software on the computer. 
Click on "Microsoft Word 
Document."
 Academic Yeear 2024
 3. A file named "Microsoft 
Word Document" will be 
created on the computer. 
You can also create it from 
the "Start" menu.
 5
Digital Technology
 4. Hover the mouse over the file, right-click, or click the right button again to see a 
new box. One of the options there will be "Rename." Click on "Rename" to change 
the name of the file. You can give it any name you want by typing on the keyboard.
 5. Now we have a document file created.
 With the file created, we will write down the problems identified for our target group. 
Write down all the problems brought by the group in our file.
 Our computer might have the English keyboard enabled, but since we will be writing 
in Bengali, we need to enable the Bengali keyboard.
 To activate the Bengali keyboard, press three keys together - Ctrl + Alt + B.
 First, we need to give the article a title. Isn’t it? If we want the title text to be slightly 
bigger than the rest, we can follow this
Write the title and select the entire title by holding down the left side of the mouse. 
Then increase the font size from the menu bar on the left side, as shown in the image.
 Once the title is written, we will write down our problems one by one, numbering them 
as 1, 2, 3, and so on.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 6
Session-3: Shortcut Key
 Isn't it fun to do things on a computer? We could write our problems in notebooks or 
on the board, however, through though this task we got to learn how to work on the 
computer. In the future, we will do most of our work using computers, so it's good to 
learn a little about it from now on.
 Today, we will continue working on word processing, but it will be like playing a game. 
Following the instructions given below, we will write down what changes happen in 
our Word file if we follow those instructions. We will try to ensure that everyone in the 
class will have a chance to participate in this game.
 We will press these 'keys' 
on the computer keyboard
 We will write the output when the keys mentioned in 
the left-hand column are pressed
 Ctrl + A The whole document is selected 
After selecting a specific 
sention press
 Ctrl + C
  the selected section is copied 
Ctrl + V
 Ctrl + B
 Ctrl + X
 Ctrl + Z
 Enter
 Backspace
 Ctrl + F
 A 'Navigation' bar appears, where we will type a word 
we are looking for in the document. Pressing Enter will 
show where that word is located in the entire document.
 Through this computer game, we have learned many useful shortcut keys for word 
processing. These shortcuts are not only helpful in Microsoft Word but also in many 
other applications. 
7
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Information in Digital Time
Now, let's move on to solving the problem for our target group. We will all decide together 
which problem we want to solve. We need to consider that while each of us may have 
different problems, there are some issues that many people in our target group face. So, we 
will choose a problem that will benefit a larger number of people. We will discuss as a group 
and decide which problem to choose
Our Target group
 The problem we have 
decided to work on
 The reason why we have 
decided to work on this 
problem 
(this section is for home 
work)
 Where we may find the 
information to solve the 
problem
 (this section is for home 
work)
 8
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Digital Technology
Information in Digital Time
 Session-4: Information Search
 The main and most important task to solving a problem is to figure out what the problem 
is and why it's happening. We have already done that part. Now, we will search for 
information and find a solution to the problem.
 Let's understand this with another example
Example of problems: 'The teacher is unable to complete a session within the given time 
due to the large number of students in the classroom.'
 The solution we need to find: 'How to manage the classroom so that the teacher can 
complete all the tasks of a session for all the students in the given time.'
 Sources of solution information can be: newspapers, another teacher, any book on this 
subject, internet.
 We will go home and gather information to solve our problem. We can use the internet 
to search for information, check if any newspaper have written about our problem, or 
even interview someone experienced or an expert.
 We will do the data search at home, but before that it is good to know some basic 
information related to data search.
 While collecting information from human sources
1.  
When we collect information from an individual, we will consider whether that 
individual is related to the information. That is, whether the person is an expert or 
experienced in the information. For example, we don't ask a person who has never 
used a computer which antivirus should be used on the computer.
 Likewise, we wouldn't want to know from a doctor.................................
 2.  
3.  
Academic Yeear 2024
 At the time of collecting taking information from a person, we will give 
importance on the actual truth or fact rather than his opinion. Opinion is a person's 
own thoughts which are expressions of feelings and facts on the other hand are 
provable information. For example, the opinion is 'It is very hot today' and the fact 
is 'The temperature today is 36 degrees Celsius.'
 The opinion is ‘The wages of labor have risen’, and the fact is ..........................
 It is also important to see if the source the person is basing the information on is 
credible enough. For example, a person came and said, I went to the market and 
heard that there was an earthquake of magnitude 8 in country A. Here the source 
is ‘market’ which is not a specific and reliable source. Here a reliable source can 
be, today on the 20th, a report on the 8 o’clock news of ‘B’ television showed that 
there was an earthquake of magnitude 8 in ‘A’ country.
 Unreliable source is, yesterday I saw on the internet that ‘A’ person received a 
special award. Reliable source is ................................. 
9
Digital Technology
 4.   
When a person provides information based on a specific source, we can verify 
whether the source actually provided the information. And verification is not 
possible unless specific sources are mentioned. For example, a person sent a 
picture of a child through social media and told my father, “The child was found 
at the crossroads, please share the post/picture more and more find his parents”.
 There is no text or information on the child's picture.
 What other information could have made us believe the child's story to be true?.........
 5.  Any information may be different or irrelevant due to the variation of context, 
situation, time, place etc. So while taking any information, a person should take 
or use the information by understanding the context in which the information is 
given. For example, if you search the internet and find out from a news in 2014 that 
there are ten education boards in Bangladesh, but currently the correct information 
is that there are eleven education boards in Bangladesh. Is your information 
incorrect? Yes, your information is incorrect with respect to the current time. Your 
data was from 2014, current data is from 2023.
 Let us give one more such example: ...............................................
 Homework:
 Considering the above issues, we will search information to solve the problem we   
identified in group at our respective homes. We will write in the box the information 
we found to solve the problem. 
Our problem:
 The set of information we gathered to solve the problem:
 Academic Yeear 2024
 10
Information in Digital Time
 Session-5: Verify Information
 As a result of advancement of technology, we receive a lot of information constantly. 
Sometimes, there may be different information about the same subject. Therefore, 
it is important to determine the most recent and reliable information. To verify the 
information we gathered, we will use the following methods with the help of the teacher
 1. Check the date when the information was circulated. Information that is true today 
may become false over time. For example, the total number of divisions in Bangladesh 
was 7 until 2014, but it changed to 8 when Mymensingh became a new division in 
2015.
 2. Seek the most recent information possible.
 3. Read the entire news or article instead of relying only on the headline or title.
 4. After watching news from one source, search using the same keywords to see if other 
sources are reporting the same news (if internet access is available).
 5. Do not believe that a news article or video is from a specific newspaper or television 
channel just by looking at its logo. Verify by visiting the website of that newspaper or 
television channel.
 6. To make sure the information is reliable, I visit the website of the organization I want 
information from. I check if the hyperlink is correct. For example, if I want information 
from the Bangladesh Textbook Board, the correct hyperlink would be http://www.nctb.
 gov.bd . Sometimes, people create fake websites that look similar to the official website 
of the Textbook Board. They might change a few letters in the link, such as replacing 
'c' with 'n', 'b' with 'd', or 'o' with 'i'. These changes may not be easily noticeable to us. 
So, it's important to double-check and make sure the link is correct before downloading 
any information.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 11
Digital Technology
 We will write down what we have learned during today's session of checking 
information:
 Academic Yeear 2024
 12
Information in Digital Time
 Session-6: Creating Contents to Present Information
 We searched for information and verified it to find a solution for our target group’s 
problem. But how do we share that with them? We can surely inform them by providing 
the information, however, presenting the solution in an appealing way can make it more 
effective.
 To do this, we decided to create content that communicates our solution. But what 
exactly is content?
 Shaibal noticed that the sky was cloudy when he was coming to school today and 
shared his opinion with his friends, saying, “You know, it will rain today.” This 
was his observation of the surroundings. If Shaibal were to capture a picture of the 
cloud with his name on it, include a rain forecast, and then share it with his friends 
through some medium, we could consider that as content created by Shaibal.
 Mala went to the market with her mother yesterday. While buying a pen from a 
shop, the shopkeeper informed her, “Buy two pens and get one free.” Mala was 
delighted to receive this information directly from the shopkeeper. If Mala had seen 
an advertisement on a poster in the market that said, “Buy two pens, get one free” 
for that shop, we could refer to that advertisement as ‘content’.
 Content is a combination of different information on a specific topic, presented through 
various media to engage and inform the reader or audience. It can take the form of 
stories from books, plays, movies, news, songs, and more. Content not only provides 
information but also entertains us.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Next, we are going to prepare contents to inform our target group about the solution of 
the problems. Since our target group is diverse across the three groups, their content 
preferences may vary. Let's take a moment to analyze how the content preferences of 
different target groups might differ. 
13
We can write down our guesses about what types of content different target groups 
might prefer in the box below.
 Target group Contents they may like 
Children who cannot read rhymes, cartoons etc
 Children who learned to read cartoons, story books, games etc
 Teenager
 Middle aged woman
 Middle aged man
 Rickshaw puller 
Store keeper 
Old man who can’t see
 Now, we need to determine the appropriate content for each target group. To do this, we 
will discuss within our teams, considering the type of problem we are solving and the 
diversity of our target audience.
 Here are some examples of different content formats we can consider:
 1. Creating a story using a sequence of pictures.
 2. Developing a rhyming song.
 3. Designing a digital poster.
 4. Producing a video.
 5. Preparing a presentation.
 6. Creating a mobile phone drama.
 7. Designing comics.
 14
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Digital Technology
Information in Digital Time
 Session-7: Making Contents by Learning Presentation Software
 We have learned much about Microsoft Word processing while organizing solutions 
for the problems we receive from our target group. It's amusing to think that when we 
were children, it took us some time to learn number tables. However, upon reflection, 
I've come to realize that number tables are not only beneficial for math but also for 
everyday calculations. Word processing follows a similar pattern - once we learn it, we 
can quickly grasp any software.
 Today, we will learn about another computer software called 'Microsoft PowerPoint'. 
It is widely used for creating presentations. There are other software options like Prezi, 
Canva, and Google Slides, but we will start with Microsoft PowerPoint because it’s 
easy to use, and once we learn it, it will be easier to learn other software.
 1. Similar to word processing, right-click to begin and select ‘New’ to create a new file. 
Choose ‘Microsoft PowerPoint Presentation’ from the options. “Rename” the file 
as you like as we have done previously and open it by double-clicking.
 2. In PowerPoint, we have many exciting features to explore and learn, but let’s start 
with the ‘New Slide’ option on the left side. Clicking here gives us various slide 
options to add to our presentation. Select a slide of your choice to proceed with 
your work.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 15
Digital Technology
 It will be time consuming to explain the functions of Microsoft PowerPoint in steps. 
We can rather explore some essential tools in the menu bar and create a presentation 
ourselves.- The 'Home' menu allows us to adjust text size, change fonts, modify colors, align 
paragraphs, and position text on the page.- The 'Insert' menu offers options to add images, tables, shapes, and icons. We can also 
insert videos and audio from the 'Media' menu. Remember to save the required 
images, videos, or audio on your computer beforehand. The 'Insert' menu is 
essential for creating content.- We can select the overall design theme for our presentation using the 'Design' menu.- The 'Transitions' menu allows us to choose how each slide appears in a sequence.- The 'Animations' menu is the most fun part. After adding text, images, shapes, 
etc., we can animate them in various ways using different designs. The 'Add 
Animation' tools provide three options:
  - How the image, text, or shape appears.
  - How the image, text, or shape stays on the slide.
  - How the image, text, or shape moves off the slide.
 Following these instructions, let's practice using a school or home computer. In the next 
session, we will complete our group content in class.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 16
Information in Digital Time
 Session-8: Presenting in Different Methods Using Same Software
 So far, we have selected a problem based on our target group and planned to create 
content as a group to solve the problem we identified earlier. Today, finally, we are 
going to create a content by ourselves. 
We will create the content in the classroom. In this session, we will focus on working 
on our content without discussing any new instructions. Once our work is complete, 
we will save it in different formats.
 To save our document in the desired format, we can click on 'Save As' in the 'File' 
menu on the left. Here are the formats we can choose based on our content:- If we want to create a digital poster, we will save it in 'JPG or JPEG' format.- If we want to share our presentation as a video, we will save it in 'MP4' format.
 Academic Yeear 2024- And since we created a presentation, if we want to present it directly, we will save it 
in 'Microsoft PowerPoint Presentation' format.
 17
Digital Technology
 Throughout the process, we have worked as a team. Once we finish our work, we will 
evaluate each team member.
 Peer Assessment:
 Name of the team members 
What I liked about the role played by my 
teammate while working in the team 
Academic Yeear 2024
 18
After our presentation, with the help of the teacher, we will share the content with our 
target group (at school, home, or a relative’s house) and ask them to provide feedback 
by filling in the stars below. They can also provide their signature under the stars.
 Opinion of the target group: