 Learning 
Experience 
2
 Use of Intellectual Property
 We learned something about intellectual property and the rights of copyright owners. 
But when we allow someone to use our intellectual property for personal or commercial 
use, we should have a guideline for that. As a result, no one can misuse our intellectual 
property. 
Have you heard of Maimansingha Gitika? It is a compilation of local songs from 
Mymensingh region. These songs have passed down orally from generation to generation 
in this region. Chandrakumar Dey first started collecting this intellectual property. Dr. 
Dinesh Chandra Sen then collected all the songs and compiled and published them into a 
book. We would not get this outstanding collection if not for the efforts of these persons.
 Can we make any intellectual property from our area usable as commercial property? 
We will try to learn that in this learning experience.
 Session-1: Intellectual Property for Personal and Commercial Use
 Hashi’s father Afzal Hossain has a yogurt manufacturing factory. The product made 
in this factory is sold in the market as ‘Hashi Yogurt’. Today after buying the yogurt, 
Hashi noticed that the taste was different. She looked closely at the packet and found 
out that instead of Hashi Yogurt, Hash Yogurt was written in the packet. But the packet 
looked the same with same colour, size and font. Everything was the same except Hash 
was printed instead of Hashi.
 It is not noticeable unless you look very carefully. Hashi was worried, so she went to 
her father with the fake yogurt and showed him everything. Afzal Hossain listened 
everything and thanked Hashi for noticing it. 
But we do not have to worry. Our yogurt tastes different from 
other yogurts. That is because I invented the formula myself 
and it is quite different from other processes. 
That is why the formula of this yogurt is intellectual property. 
I will talk to one of my lawyer friends about this fake yogurt 
and take legal action against them
 Academic Yeear 2024
 20
As we have trademarked our product, so the people who faked our intellectual property 
and are selling them in the open market will have to compensate for that. Also they 
have to stop selling their fake product. Hashi was a bit relieved after hearing this.
 In the story above, we can see that Afzal Hossain has created intellectual property. He 
had made yogurt with a formula, which is different from others’ formula. That is why 
this is intellectual property. Then he has marketed the product. 
People who are buying Hashi Yogurt are buying this personally as a commodity. That 
means they are only buying the rights to consume the product.
 In this case, intellectual property is being used as personal purpose.
 When someone buys a product personally, they gain the right to use it. But that does 
not give them the right to use the product commercially. 
On the other hand, the company which created a fake product copying the packet of 
Hashi Yogurt is using it commercially. 
If someone wants to use intellectual property commercially, they have to take 
necessary permission from the rights owner. Only after a formal agreement they can 
use it commercially.
 Let’s do an activity. There are some examples of intellectual property below. Let us find 
out if the intellectual property is being used personally or commercially and if the use 
is just or not. 
a. Mizan registered to a website to watch a 
famous Bangla film. He paid a subscription 
fee to become a subscriber. But the website did 
not obtain permission from the film’s producer 
to show it. Mizan is happily watching the film 
now.
 Decision: Mizan is using the intellectual property for personal purpose. But the website 
has not taken necessary permission for its commercial use. So, they are not obeying 
the law and the film’s producers can take legal action against the website owners.
 21
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Use of Intellectual Property
Digital Technology
 b. Mitu was looking for software online and 
found that she had to buy it from the developer 
at the cost of 50 taka. Her friend Hena told 
her that she did not need to buy the software 
as she had it. She suggested Mitu to copy it 
from her. Mitu said that it was not right. She 
has bought the licence from the developers’ 
website and is now using it.
 Decision:
 Academic Yeear 2024
 22
Use of Intellectual Property
 c. A famous soft drink manufacturing company gave 
their formula to a Bangladeshi marketing company after 
an agreement was signed. But another company started 
selling a product in the market by the same name. Then 
the company that signed the agreement went to the court.
 Decision:
 Academic Yeear 2024
 23
Digital Technology
 d. Raihan has written a travel book based 
on his different travelling experiences. 
He has signed an agreement with a 
publishing company and allowed them 
to market his book with condition 
that he would get the copyright. The 
company has published the book in this 
year’s book fair and the book has been a 
hit among the readers.  
Decision:
 24
 Academic Yeear 2024
Use of Intellectual Property
 Session-2: Protecting the Rights of the Copyright Owner
 We learned from reading a story in the last session that Afzal Hossain was considering 
demanding compensation in the court for commercially misusing the rights of Hashi 
Yogurt. But Afzal Hossain could not claim compensation if he did not have the 
trademarked. We have learned about copyright and patent previous earlier. But what is 
trademark? 
Trademark is a unique logo or name of slogan that can differentiate intellectual 
property from other similar property.
 Name
 Symbol
 Colour
 Shape
 Slogan
 Type of logo
 A company or an individual registers a certain trademark for their intellectual property 
before commercially marketing that product. 
As a result, no one can make fake copies of 
their intellectual property and market it as 
per their wish.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Because of this, the rights of the copyright 
owners are protected and if anyone wants 
to misuse their property, they can take legal 
action.
 Bangladesh is a member country of the 
World Trade Organization. So there is an 
opportunity to follow their rules and register 
trademarks in Bangladesh. 
25
Digital Technology
 There are five steps to follow to register the trademark for intellectual property
a. Fill up a form in the website of Department of Patents, Design and Trademark and pay 
a fee to register. We have to inform in details why we are asking to register trademark 
as the copyright owner of our intellectual property.
 b. Some responsible officers from the department will verify our claim of the intellectual 
property. They will check if it is intellectual property or not, qualifies to have a trademark 
or not, does the trademark match other registered trademarks or not, etc. 
c. If the department finds your application acceptable, they will publish an advertisement 
in the national dailies asking if 
any other trademark holder has 
any objection to your proposed 
trademark. 
d. If any other trademark holder 
f
 inds similarities with the new 
trademark with their own, they 
can submit an objection. For this, 
they will have to fill up another 
form from the department’s 
website. They will have to 
explain why the new trademark 
should not be acceptable.
 The new trademark applicant 
can also present their own logic. 
The department will resolve the issue after listening from both the sides.
 e. If the department finally decides the applicant will be given the trademark, then the 
registration will be completed. A trademark certificate will be provided to the owner as 
a proof of registration. 
At the end of this Learning Experience we want to commercialise intellectual property, 
don’t we? So let us do something.
 Let’s design a logo for that imaginary intellectual property as the trademark in the next 
page. 
Academic Yeear 2024
 26
Let’s do another activity. Let’s fill up a sample form for trademark registration for our 
intellectual property. For the required information, which you do not have, you can give 
imaginary ones – 
Name of the applicant: … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … …
 Nationality: … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … …
 Address: … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … …....
 Mobile: … … … … … … … … … … … … … Email: … … … … … … … … ….... 
Product Description: … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … 
 … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … …  … … … … … … … … 
… … … … … … … … … … … …  … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … 
… … … …  … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … …  … … … … 
… … … … … … … … … … … … … … … …  … … … … … … … … … … … … 
… … … … … … … …  … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … 
27
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Use of Intellectual Property
Copy of Mark (Design):
 Signature and date: … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … 
The main application form of trademark registration does not look entirely like this. 
But we have filled out all the important parts in this sample form. When we apply for a 
trademark for intellectual property, we will fill up the official form.
 If we have access to internet, we can go to http://www.dpdt.gov.bd website and 
download the trademark application form.
 Preparation for next session:
 Different companies have taken legal action in Bangladesh and elsewhere in the world 
for misusing their trademarks in personal or commercial use in different times. Let’s 
collect some related news reports from newspapers and online for the next session. Let 
us also think which infringement of those incidents was due to personal use and which 
was commercial. 
28
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Digital Technology
Use of Intellectual Property
 Session-3: Making a Report on Trademark Related Legal Action
 We have researched some incidents regarding trademark related legal actions. Now 
we will make a report out of it. 
To make the report we have to do the following tasks– 
1.  The teacher will divide us into some groups first.
 2.  We all in the group will discuss the incidents we were looking for and decide on 
which incident we will prepare our report.
 3.  We have to select a particular incident. So we have to make sure that we get all the 
answers to the following questions in the published news. If we get all the answers 
then we can work with that incident.
 Primary
 question
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Next
 question
 Final
 question
 Is the legal action for intellectual property? 
Is there information about both the parties involved?
 Was the dispute about personal or commercial use? 
Does the report mention statements of both parties?
 What evidence was submitted to the court? 
Was the final verdict delivered or not?
 29
4. This way we have made the final plan to work with an incident. To make our work 
easier, let’s write down the answers of the six questions above in the box below—
 5. Now we will discuss different pieces of information regarding the selected incident 
and analyse the whole situation. We will prepare a report on what decision we have 
arrived in and if we agree with the legal verdict or our opinions in this regard.
 Let’s write the main part of our report in the box below— 
30
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Digital Technology
Use of Intellectual Property
 6. Let’s now present the report we have prepared in front of the teacher and the students 
in groups.
 When we permit someone to use our cultural intellectual property commercially, we too 
have to notice if we are following any rules or violating any copyright owner’s rights. 
Because if we do, then any rights owner can take legal actions against our intellectual 
property. 
Session-4: Making a Terms and Conditions Sheet Regarding an 
Intellectual Property
 Ritu has recently developed a mobile application software that can control different 
electronic devices at home like lights, fans, etc.
 She has also trademarked the software 
following proper guidelines so that she can 
commercialise it. One day her father asked 
her, ‘Have you made terms and conditions for 
the users of your software?’ 
Ritu was surprised a bit and said, ‘I made a 
manual for the users on how to use the software. 
But What should terms and conditions should 
I make for them?’ 
Her father said, ‘Listen, when we install 
software, it shows us some terms and 
conditions first.
 This means we are informed what rules to 
abide by while using the software. We can 
only use the software when we agree to obey all the terms and conditions. Otherwise, 
anyone can misuse your software or remarket it. Not only for software, any intellectual 
property should have terms and conditions for personal and commercial use. It will 
prevent misuse of that property.’
 Ritu heard everything and realised that now she has to make terms and conditions for 
her software.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 We learned from the story above that the copyright owner has to make terms and 
conditions for the users of their intellectual property so that they know the restrictions 
attached to it. 
31
For example, say there is a website where you can login with your ID and password and 
stream films. Now the website developers want that if only one person registers to their 
website, only that person can enjoy all of their contents.
 This means multiple users cannot use the same account to enjoy their contents. This is 
because otherwise they will incur financial loss as 100 people can use their contents 
from a single account.
 In this case, the online platform will add to the T/C for their users that more than one 
users cannot enjoy their contents from a single account by any means. 
Similarly, any intellectual property should have terms and conditions for their users.
 In the last session we made a presentation regarding trademark related legal actions.
 We learned about several lawsuits and the problems related to those lawsuits. Let us 
now do the following activity— 
1. With the knowledge from the lawsuits, let’s think of some terms and conditions that 
should be applicable to intellectual property. 
2. Let’s write down in the following box the terms and conditions we think should be 
there after discussion in the group. Let’s mention which terms are for personal use and 
which are for commercial use with tick marks. 
Proposed terms and conditions for intellectual property
 Proposed terms Personal use Commercial 
use
 32
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Digital Technology
Proposed terms and conditions for intellectual property
 Proposed terms Personal use Commercial 
use
 33
 Academic Yeear 2024
 Use of Intellectual Property
Digital Technology
 3. Of the T/C we have thought about, some will be applicable for personal use. Similarly, 
some will be applicable for commercial use too. We have identified in that way. Now 
we will coordinate all the terms and conditions. We will write an article mentioning 
which terms we ourselves will follow for the use of our intellectual property we are 
going to work about next. Let’s mention the main part of the article in the box below – 
Academic Yeear 2024
 34
Use of Intellectual Property
 Session-5: Let’s Make Intellectual Property Suitable for 
Commercial Use 
Investigative Work
 We have already learned about different types of intellectual property. If we think of our 
own areas or districts, what intellectual property can be found here? Any specific local 
food, traditional house or place, song, verse, dance, sound or language, or any musical 
instrument, establishment, etc., of a particular area can be the intellectual property of 
that area. Do we know of any intellectual property in our area that may not be so well 
known to others or does not have a trademark? Similarly, now we are going to work 
with intellectual property of our area
1.  First, as before, each group of us will 
look for such intellectual property in 
our area or district.
 2.  We may take a longer time for this 
search upon the teacher’s permission.  
3.  In this case, we may take the help of 
different people in the area because 
they may have information about 
such materials. 
4. After collecting our selected 
intellectual property, we will collect 
detailed content. The content can be 
texts, images, videos, etc.
 Academic Yeear 2024
 35
Digital Technology
 5. This time, we will make that content 
suitable for commercial use. The property 
must be trademark registered to make it 
suitable for commercial use. We have known 
earlier how to do the trademark registration of 
any intellectual property for its commercial 
use. We will apply for trademark registration 
of that intellectual property by visiting 
the specified website and following the 
procedure.
 6. In this case, the intellectual property’s original owner must first explain what the 
intellectual property is and the importance of trademarking it. So, your group needs 
to give the original owner a clear idea about it so that s/he agrees to register his/her 
intellectual property as a trademark. 
7. Then, the intellectual property owner has to be explained his next responsibility by 
applying for registration of the trademark within the prescribed period.
 8. Then, a policy of commercial use of that intellectual property has to be formulated. 
You will also help the original owner formulate this policy by following the rules shown 
in the book. 
9. You can help make his intellectual property appropriate for commercial use. 
Surely, after completing the whole procedure, the owner of intellectual property in 
your area will benefit a lot. Besides, when you become an intellectual property owner 
yourself, you will also benefit from this prior experience. Wonderful, no? Everyone in 
your group has got a great experience while helping someone else. 
Academic Yeear 2024
 36
During our whole working time, we will do different tasks in different weeks as per the 
table below 
Week Task
 1st & 2nd 
weeks Search centre of intellectual property.
 3rd week All in the group will decide which intellectual property they will 
work on. 
4th week Collection of intellectual property in the form of content
 5th week Giving ideas to the original owner of intellectual property on the 
appropriate commercial use of his property.
 6th week Application for trademark registration. 
7th week Formulating policies for commercial use of intellectual property.
 8th week Exchanging experience on the entire work in the classroom.
 Have you noticed what beautiful intellectual property we have worked with in this 
learning experience? Congratulations to you and your group! Similarly, when you 
create intellectual property yourself, you will follow the necessary steps for personal 
and commercial use of it. Then, no one can misuse your intellectual property.